hello everyone my name is Alex and I'm
one of the expert IELTS teachers here at
e2 language welcome to our first ever
on-demand class in this session I'm
going to be showing you the writing
tasks to that you voted for in our
Facebook and Instagram polls
I'm gonna walk you step-by-step through
planning and writing a high-level essay
we're going to review the marking
criteria if you're aiming at above 6.5
I've got some important information for
you and at the end of course I'm going
to work on editing and some error
correction so let's get started I'm
going to take you through four simple
steps to plan and write this essay and
step one it's a really simple one we are
going to read the question carefully we
always have the same instructions here
they are you should spend about 40
minutes on this task write about the
following topic and here is the topic
that you voted for nowadays people waste
a lot of food that was bought from shops
and restaurants why do you think people
waste food what can be done to reduce
the amount of food they throw away and
underneath this is the instructions that
come with every task to give reasons for
your answer include relevant examples
from your knowledge experience write 250
words now you'll notice here that there
are actually two questions one two and
this makes it really easy when it comes
to planning because we've got two
distinct questions so this is step two
we're gonna plan our four paragraphs we
always have the introduction and the
conclusion and body one and two we need
to generate ideas for these by the way
guys our YouTube videos are just a tiny
part of what we do here at e2 language
so if you're after more personal
feedback particularly for your writing
then make sure you check us out we are
100% online so you can study whenever
you want wherever you want submit work
for feedback take a one-on-one tutorial
join our live interactive classes catch
up with recorded classes anytime that
you like so just put the work in now so
that you can conquer your IELTS and get
on with the rest of your life isn't that
what it's all about
so let's get back to planning the essay
for today here are two questions and you
can see here that we've basic
got a cause and solution si I'm gonna
start with the first question why do you
think people waste food now when it
comes to generating ideas for your essay
sometimes it helps to start from a
really personal point of view so think
about when was the last time that you
wasted food or you left some food in a
restaurant why did you do it and build
your essay from that personal standpoint
so for me I think that people tend to
waste their food basically because they
have more money which means that they're
not so concerned about wasting it so
losing a few dollars here and there
doesn't really make a difference some
people some lucky people might know
$2,000 disposable income for the month
much more than in the past so a little
bit of that on wasted food doesn't
really impact them the other factor is
the modern throwaway culture this is
kind of the idea that everything is
disposable so people would chuck out a
TV the washing machine computers so
wasting food is just a symptom of this
mindset so you can see here for this
question I've got two distinct ideas so
I'm gonna put these into a double idea
paragraph basically I'll stick a topic
sentence on the top and then develop
each of those two points so let's move
on to the second question what can be
done to reduce the amount we throw away
here we're dealing with solutions but
the question doesn't explicitly ask me
for solutions there's no plural in this
question which means that I can use a
double idea paragraph if I have two
solutions or just one if I have one
solution and in fact I can just think of
one thing which is this the public's
mindset needs to change so how do we do
this how do we change the public mindset
well education campaigns and awareness
raising a couple of ideas can I give an
example or evidence of this yes I can
for example in Australia the ABCs war on
waste project which was a TV show
podcast the website did a really good
job to raise people's awareness
and bring about some drastic change so
all of this can help to teach people
practical ways to reduce the food that
they waste here is a single idea
paragraph now in the real test your plan
might be much simpler much shorter than
that it may only take a minute
to generate those ideas but as you
prepare for the test investing time in a
plan is a really good idea it helps you
it'll help make life easier on test day
so we're on to step three now probably
the most important one let's write
here's our topic again just to refresh
your memory and we're gonna get started
with the introduction now generally we
follow the same pattern for the
introduction and it always begins with a
neutral background sentence just setting
the scene he is mine in some parts of
the world food is still highly valued
next sentence and reword the question in
urban areas however particularly in the
developed world food waste is becoming a
major concern so we're really zooming in
on the actual question the actual task
here the problem of food waste and last
segments of the intro we're gonna tell
the reader the main idea of the body
this says they will examine the causes
of this problem it's just ways that
people can curb the amount they discard
next up is body 1 so I've got my plan in
mind if I'm in the tests I've got the
plan in front of me I need to start with
the topic sentence this is a double idea
paragraph so my topic sentence lets the
reader know that two things are coming
two main factors are behind the rise in
food waste the first one the first is of
rising incomes of the population which
has meant higher disposable incomes and
then my reason or examples or evidence
my extension in other words whereas 50
years ago the average family had around
50 dollars per month to spend on food
and entertainment now the figure is more
like two thousand and so the idea of
buying something and not consuming it is
remarkable on to my second point the
second factor linked to the first is the
modern throwaway culture in which all
products are treated as disposable and
the extension of this idea since it is
not uncommon to find valuable household
items thrown in the bin
it is also unsurprising to see half the
family's grocery beamed without concern
this is a really strong paragraph and I
want to draw your attention to what
makes it a good paragraph and also some
of the dangers some of the reasons why
you might be scoring six or six point
five so this is the marking criteria for
writing task 2 and in IELTS writing
everything comes down to this criteria
so your work is marked by an examiner
and they actually give you four separate
scores one for a task response one for
coherence cohesion this is linking a
paragraphing one for lexical resource or
vocabulary and grammatical range and
accuracy range and accuracy now down the
left you can see the scores bear nine is
the top expert user and actually it goes
right down to zero but for this today
I've just gone to bed for now let's say
you score Ben seven in task response
seven in coherence cohesion seven in
vocabulary but up six in grammatical
range and accuracy you know
unfortunately this will bring your score
down to six point five which is a
place-- a lot of people get stuck so I
want to look at this criterion the
grammatical range and accuracy criterion
and just show you a couple of things to
be careful with if we zoom in here on
band seven the first bullet point says
uses a variety of complex structures
this is really important variety of
complex structures and we can contrast
this with and four which says users only
a very limited range of structures with
rare use of subordinate clauses rare use
of subordinate clauses and what is a
subordinate clause the big word
basically it's two things either clauses
with subordinate conjunctions
what is that it's worth like although as
when while and it could be sentences or
clauses with relative pronouns like who
which that when let me show you a list
of some subordinating conjunctions so
they're actually pretty common words
you're probably very familiar with these
like although since when while and it's
important that you get these words into
your writing in order to score above
been for and hopefully up at band seven
so here's my paragraph again and let me
just highlight some of the complex
structures here got which whereas the
subordinating conjunction linked to the
first this is a reduced relative clause
in which and since so all of this makes
my writing more complex and it's very
important in order to score above six or
six point five in grammar
let's go on to writing body two now so
on to the solutions topic sentence as
always tackling this issue involves
altering the public's mindset the rest
of my paragraph is just supporting this
and explaining how and with an example
so this needs to happen via
awareness-raising campaigns the ABC for
instance launched one such initiative
with the war on waste TV series and
website in 2016 which relative pronoun
presented troubling facts on the effects
of our consumption and waste given the
profound impact of this series on the
Australian public it would be worth
expanding it on a global scale so we
should go worldwide with such campaigns
in addition to warning people about the
environmental impact of food wastage
such projects could also educate them
better on practical matters such as
shopping smarter historian feed
correctly so let's have a look at
another criterion in another place where
people often drop down to a band six
from a band seven
I'll show you how to beware of that so
I'm looking here at coherence and
cohesion the second column and if we
zoom in here at band six you'll see uses
cohesive devices effectively but
cohesion with the nm between sentences
made it faulty or mechanical linking may
be faulty or mechanical so what does
that mean well a faulty linker is when
you're using a linking word like
although however while and the grammar
around it is not right this is a faulty
linker it will cost you and seven
causing band six what is the mechanical
linker this is something that we talk
about quite often in our live classes so
make sure you come along and learn what
they are and how to avoid them if we
look down here now and five we've also
got linking problems now says too many
not enough or incorrect linker so are
you over using Linkens are you overusing
the word and or Bart or so are you using
incorrect linkers are you using not
enough link it's all of these things can
drop your score down to band five
another thing in band five is the word
repetitive maybe repetitive because of
lack of referencing and substitution so
if you find as you've read you've got
the same word over and over and over yes
it's a vocabulary problem but it's
probably more of a coherence cohesion
problem you need to use references so
let me show you my paragraph again and
I'll point out some of the cohesive
devices and the linkers I've got for
instance given in addition to also such
as so notice they're not too many and
they are not mechanical they are not
robotic referencing now referencing so
important tiny little words but they are
like the glue that holds your essay
together and you can see quite a lot of
them this issue this one such initiative
this series it such projects and them
these little words make all the
difference they make this paragraph they
make this essay flow really smoothly so
this brings us
to the conclusion conclusion pretty
simple we just go for two or three
sentences the first one broad statement
about the topic and I always start with
in conclusion in conclusion and less
efforts are made to shift the public
consciousness this problem will only
escalate and a summary while governments
have a critical role to play individuals
to need to take responsibility for their
shopping habits in order to cut down on
wasted food and that's it at the end of
the essay but there is one final step
one really critical step it is time to
edit now obviously I have written this
essay I'm pretty confident it's perfect
so I'm gonna give you a challenge here
I'm gonna show you the full essay but
I've added eight mistakes and your job
is to find those eight mistakes and
correct them and this is the process you
should do with your own work when you
finish writing go back to the beginning
and tell yourself there must be a
mistake in here that I'm gonna find and
I'm gonna fix reducing your errors can
lift your score so here's the full essay
please take two minutes to read through
and find eight errors either spelling
errors or grammar errors good luck
so how did you go did you find all eight
errors let's have a look here is the
error highlighted and here are the
corrections becoming a major concern
missing article two main factors
disposable incomes not disposal items
thrown in the bin this issue involves
subject verb agreement problem it would
be worth expanding educate them and
lastly a spelling error that should be
government's with them n I so this is
what our full sample essay looks like
let's review the four steps we went
through to write it number one read the
question or the questions carefully step
to plan your full paragraphs and think
about whether you're writing single or
double idea once step three write as you
write make sure you're getting in
complex structures subordinating clauses
relative clauses and be careful with
your linking and referencing to make
your writing flow step 4 edit carefully
so guys thanks for joining me today and
I look forward to seeing you at a two
language comm in a live class or
one-on-one tutorial make sure you check
us out and get on top of your IELTS
preparation thanks for watching
you
[Music]